Post - Presentation (#47)
GeekMasher/geekmasher.dev: content/posts/21-11-05--presentations.md

---
title: Creating Presentations using Markdown and Marp
created: "2021-11-05T14:00:00.000Z"
updated: "2021-11-05T14:00:00.000Z"
template: "post"
draft: false
slug: "/posts/creating-presentations-using-marp"
banner:
  path: /media/presentations-marp.png
  caption: "Microsoft, Google, and Marp"
tags:
  - Presentation
  - Slides
  - Decks
  - Markdown
  - Marp
  - JavaScript
description: "Have you ever wanted to create a presentation that isn't a Power Point pptx or Google Sheet? Don't look any further then Markdown and Marp!"
---

> During the past two month I volunteered to present at both [DC44131 (Edinburgh)](https://dc44131.org/) and [Abertay HackSoc](https://hacksoc.co.uk/) but I didn't want to use either Microsoft's Power Point (or Open Office) or Google's Slides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the past two months I've volunteered to present at both [DC44131 (Edinburgh)](https://dc44131.org/) and [Abertay HackSoc](https://hacksoc.co.uk/) but I didn't want to use either Microsoft's Power Point (or Open Office) or Google's Slides.
```

> In the past I've tried to use [RemarkJS](https://github.com/gnab/remark) but at the time I had some issues with it and decide to not check it out again for my presentation needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the past I've tried to use [RemarkJS](https://github.com/gnab/remark) but at the time I had some issues with it and decided not to check it out again for my presentation needs.
```

For this project I used Markdown as the content format and [Marp](https://marp.app/) ([open-source](https://github.com/marp-team/marp)) as the core engine to build the slides into HTML and PDFs.

![Hotline Bling Meme Presentation Marp](/media/memes/HotlineBling-Marp.jpg)

This project is [open source](https://github.com/geekmasher/presentations) and you can find the slides at [presentation.geekmasher.dev](https://presentation.geekmasher.dev)

## Markdown and Git(Hub)

First things first, using git to store and version control your slides is just awesome!

> No longer are we using NFS shares or a FTP server to store our code, why shouldn't your slides be any different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No longer are we using NFS shares or a FTP server to store our code - why shouldn't your slides be any different?
```

[Markdown](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/) is then a natural choice from there as it's simple and easy to use.

> [Latex](https://www.latex-project.org/get/) is great and a very powerful language and alternative but a little overkill for what I was looking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Latex](https://www.latex-project.org/get/) is great and a very powerful language alternative but a little overkill for what I was looking for.
```

> The finally part is using [GitHub](https://github.com) to publicly share the content of the slides to share your knowledge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final part is using [GitHub](https://github.com) to publicly share the content of the slides to share your knowledge.
```

This also helps for creating drafts of slides, staging environment, and requesting people to review your content using [Pull Requests](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/about-pull-request-reviews).

### Structuring Markdown

> There is two main structural components to think about when creating your slides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two main structural components to think about when creating your slides.
```

> The first is the how to separate slides from each other by using the build in markdown separator / `---` syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first is how to separate slides from each other by using the build in markdown separator / `---` syntax.
```

This looks like the following:

```markdown
---
# Slide 1

Content for slide 1 goes here.

---
# Slide 2

More content for slide 2
```

> This allows for lots of slides to be split up and structure as per your requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows for lots of slides to be split up and structured as per your requirements.
```

Second are [Marp directives](https://marpit.marp.app/directives) which can be added at the top of the file or for each slide in the form of headers.
Here is an example of some core (but not all) directives at the top of this slide:

```markdown
---
theme: gaia
class: lead
paginate: true
backgroundColor: '#eae8db'
color: '#392020'
---
<!-- rest of the slides ... -->
```

Each of these directives is applied to every slide in the deck.
Here is a list of these main directives that I recommend to pay attention to:

- `theme`
  - Specify theme of the slide deck.
- `class`
  - Specify HTML class of slide’s `<section>` element.
- `paginate`
  - Show page number on the slide if you set `true`.
- `backgroundColor` and `color`
  - Setting `background` and `color` colours 

All of these can also be set using Markdown comments at each slide that can be parsed by Marp.
Example is the following for this slide:

```markdown
---
<!-- _class: lead -->
# Slide

And the slide content...
```

> The underscore sets the directive for that one slide and if its removed that will apply to every slide until the directive is set again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The underscore sets the directive for that one slide and if it's removed that will apply to every slide until the directive is set again.
```

> There are other things to look into such as the following but these aren't as critical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other things to look into such as the following but these aren't as critical:
```

Once you have both the slides structured and understand some of the most important directives, you are ready to build your slides with the engine. 

## Marp!

[Marp](https://marp.app/) is the core technology used to create the slides deck from Markdown.
This was extremely easy after installing the [`marp-cli`](https://github.com/marp-team/marp-cli) using npm or [other package managers](https://github.com/marp-team/marp-cli#use-package-manager).

```bash
npm install --save-dev @marp-team/marp-cli
```

I recommend using NPM as this will be very useful for customisations.

> For those whom use [VSCode there is a plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=marp-team.marp-vscode) that can be used to make highlighting and preview the slides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For those who use [VSCode there is a plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=marp-team.marp-vscode) that can be used to highlight and preview your slides before committing.
```

The main use case of the CLI is to take Markdown files and produce a number of outputs (HTML, PDF, or even pptx).

> This can be done and allow us to quickly create a slide deck with very little effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be done and allows us to quickly create a slide deck with very little effort.
```

```bash
marp --output "index.html" slides.md
```

> Now that we can create a slide deck, lets customise our slides to the exact requirements we have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we can create a slide deck, let's customise our slides to the exact requirements we have.
```

This requires some knowledge of JavaScript but shouldn't stop the simplest of changes to be done.

> There are two main elements I wanted for my slides;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two main elements I wanted for my slides:
```

const optionsInclude = {
    root: '.',
    includeRe: /!include(.+)/,
    bracesAreOptional: false
};

// Export module 
module.exports = (opts) => new Marp(opts)
    .use(markdownItFootnote)
    .use(markdownItContainer, 'columns')
    .use(markdownItInclude, optionsInclude)
```

The final result is a command that allows me to create HTML slides with a custom engine to allow me to do all I need.

```bash
marp --engine ./src/engine.js \
    --no-stdin \
    --output "index.html" \
    index.md
```

*Side note:* I use the `--no-stdin` for now.sh due to Marp waiting for my Markdown to be passed into STDIN (known bug).

## Deployment

The last and final step is to deploy your presentation to allow remote access and others to view the awesome work you have been developing.
I recommend using a service like [now.sh / vercel](https://now.sh) to make your life easier by doing the heavy lifting for you.

You can either use the CLI or their GitHub git integration to allow you to publish your presentations with a click of a button.
I'll be choosing the latter as this gives me the simplicity of deploying the application and all the different staging environments.

## Conclusion

> Once setup and configured to your hearts content writing slides couldn't be easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once setup, and configured to your heart's content, writing slides couldn't be easier.
```

> Now you can create Markdown files and build an awesome looking slide deck built using open source tools and work on any platform. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can create Markdown files and build an awesome looking slide deck built using open source tools which will work on any platform. 
```
